---
layout: portfolio_entry
title: Best practices in API documentation
image: /img/blog-images/api_docs.gif
---
User friendly API documentation can be the critical driver for widening adoption and usage of your API services. In this post, I talk through some key considerations in creating great API documentation and why these are important.

## Who is your target audience?
**Managers** such as CTOs or Product Managers. They are trying to work out if your API services will solve their problems. They can be instrumental in deciding whether or not to adopt your API services.

**Developers** are the end users of your API. They want to know how easy it is to integrate and whether it resolves their specific use case or issue.

## What do they want?
They want to integrate your API right now - this minute - if not sooner. They do not want to spend any time at all confused or figuring something out. They want to get maximum value and usage of your API easily and they want the whole experience to be joyful.

## Why do they need great API documentation?
Even if you have the most super, awesome, game changer product known to humanity ever; it doesn't matter at all - unless people know how to use it.

Great API documentation is the best possible way to maximise adoption and usage. It is not enough to have an amazing product. The two go hand in hand.

Your product becomes more valuable when people use it and talk about it to their friends and anyone else who might be listening.

## How do you deliver great docs?
Obviously, I have a lot to say here but keep in mind the following and you will be on the right path:

### Ensure you are meeting user needs
Support your users with the content they need - when they need it.
More experienced users may well be content with a comprehensive API reference guide with lots of examples. Managerial or less technical users may need a more progressive approach with lots of hand holding.
The following are suggested key sections to include in non reference docs.
* API Overview
* Getting started tutorial
* Authentication and authorization requirements
* Status and error codes
* Rate limiting and thresholds
* Code samples/tutorials
* SDKs and sample apps
* Quick reference guide
* Resources
* Glossary

### Provide completeness and clarity
Support your users by using straightforward language without jargon. Avoid overloading users by breaking up text into bite-size, digestible chunks of content.

### Offer interactivity
Creating a console or sandbox environment can help users get to grips with your API in a an immediate and powerful way.  

## Great API Docs matter
There isn't any point compromising on great API documentation as it is such an important driver of successful adoption of your API services. I hope this post has been useful to you.  
